# Relations with Japan and Korea

Among China’s neighbors in Asia, Chinese leaders gave highest priority to relations with the governments of northeastern Asia, Japan, and the administrations of North and South Korea. The salient reasons included the strategic location of these nations close to the economic centers of China’s modernization; their economic, political, and military power and importance to China; and their close involvement with the United States. The record of Chinese foreign relations in this area in the post–Cold War period was very mixed. Though trade and other economic ties advanced, China’s overall management of relations with Japan seemed to fail, reaching crisis with mass anti-Japanese demonstrations in China in 2005. Through strong efforts by the Chinese and Japanese governments, relations subsequently improved. The Democratic Justice Party government of Japan elected in 2009 tried to move closer to China and away from Japan’s traditionally close alignment with the United States, but confrontations over disputed territorial claims headed a long list of disputes that deepened mutual wariness and suspicion and brought relations to another low point in 2010.

Chinese leaders usually showed more skill in managing very difficult and often contradictory imperatives coming from North and South Korea, endeavoring to sustain China’s position in Pyongyang and markedly advancing China’s relations with Seoul. China’s interest in stability on the peninsula was seriously challenged by North Korea’s missile and nuclear weapons development, provocative military attacks against South Korea, and the uncertain leadership succession arrangements of the ailing North Korean dictator Kim Jong Il. China joined the consensus of concerned powers in applying some sanctions and limited pressure on Pyongyang, but it eschewed actions that would seriously disrupt Chinese efforts to solidify close ties with North Korea during a period of leadership change.1

# RELATIONS WITH JAPAN

The future stability of eastern Asia will depend heavily on the relationship between the main regional powers, China and Japan. Relations between the two swung markedly in the post–Cold War period. At first, both powers adjusted their bilateral relations amicably following the demise of the Soviet Union and its strategic influence in eastern Asia. The rise of China’s power and influence in Asian affairs in the 1990s, combined with Chinese military assertiveness over Taiwan and the South China Sea in the mid-1990s, coincided with a protracted period of lackluster Japanese economic performance and weak political leadership. This called into question the past disparity of the economic relationship between the two powers; added to ongoing differences over territorial, strategic, historical, and economic issues; and strengthened the wariness and occasional antipathy between the two countries.2

For much of the past decade, Chinese relations with Japan worsened, especially over historical and territorial issues. Chinese concerns with Japan’s defense posture, including its notably strengthened alliance relationship with the United States, added to this trend in declining relations. Tensions in China’s relations with Japan undermined Chinese influence in Japan.3 They seriously complicated China’s broader strategy in Asia, which was based on a good-neighbor policy—with China seeking to enhance its influence by dealing with Asian countries in an accommodating way, putting aside differences, and seeking greater areas of common ground.

China’s deteriorating relationship with Japan was sometimes accompanied by Chinese efforts to isolate its neighbor, even from its ally the United States. Chinese strong objections over Japan’s treatment of historical issues sensitive to China and others in Asia and repeated visits by Japanese Prime Minister Junichiro Koizumi (2001–2006) to the controversial Yasukuni war memorial succeeded in putting the Japanese government on the defensive. Nonetheless, the harshly critical treatment of China’s most important neighbor also seemed to belie Chinese broader declarations of goodwill, accommodation, and “win-win” solutions. It prompted Japan, possessing great wealth and Asia’s most modern military force, to prepare for protracted difficulties and rivalry with China in Asia while adding to broader regional wariness over Chinese intentions.4

The George W. Bush administration worked assiduously to strengthen the alliance with Japan and found a willing and effective partner in the Japanese administration of Prime Minister Koizumi. Both sides played down persisting trade and other disputes as the bilateral relationship reached new heights of strategic and political cooperation.5 The alliance remained strong after Koizumi’s departure, though later Liberal Democratic Party (LDP) governments were short lived, politically weak, and less effective in developing their avowed goals of close alignment with the United States.6

By contrast, Chinese–Japanese political and security relations deteriorated markedly despite burgeoning trade and large Japanese investment in China. Disputes ranged widely and involved competing and highly nationalistic views of Japan’s military expansion in Asia prior to 1945; territorial and resource conflicts in the East China Sea; rising Japanese concerns over China’s military buildup focused on Taiwan, and Chinese concerns about Japan’s closer cooperation with the United States regarding Taiwan; Chinese concerns over Japan’s closer military cooperation with the United States over ballistic missile defense and in regard to international deployments of Japanese forces; Sino–Japanese competition for Russian and other energy resources; and Chinese opposition to Japan’s efforts to obtain a permanent seat on the UN Security Council.7

The Democratic Justice Party of Japan won the general election in 2009 and deposed the long-ruling and more conservative Liberal Democratic Party. Its pro-China gestures came to naught amid repeated disputes, particularly over salient territorial and trade issues. Anti-Japanese demonstrations took place in China, and public opinion of China in Japan reached new lows.8

Underlying the deterioration of relations was a continuing change in regional power relationships. China’s rising power and influence in Asian affairs since the 1990s, combined with Chinese military buildup and assertiveness focused on Taiwan and territorial issues around its periphery, coincided with Japan enduring a second decade of poor economic performance. As China loomed larger as Asia’s leader in economic growth, Japan responded with deepening concern over its place in Asian and world affairs. This added to ongoing differences over territorial, strategic, historical, and economic issues and strengthened the suspicion between the two countries. Meanwhile, stronger nationalism in both countries put them at odds over a variety of sensitive issues related to history and territorial claims.9 Notable in this regard was Chinese concern over deepening U.S.–Japanese alliance relations seen directed at rising China.10

# Salient Trends and Key Determinants in Sino–Japanese Relations

The sharp downturn in Sino–Japanese relations prompted debate among specialists about the determinants and direction of Sino–Japanese relations. Some experts predicted an increasingly intense competition, including likely confrontation and possible conflict in future Sino–Japanese relations.11 They highlighted changes in attitudes of Japanese and Chinese decision makers, opinion leaders, and popular opinion about the status and outlook of their mutual relations. They tended to see initiatives reflecting strong Sino–Japanese friction and rivalry.12 Signs of Sino–Japanese competition and rivalry included the following:

• Separate and seemingly competing proposals by China and Japan to establish free trade arrangements with the ten Southeast Asian nations in the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) and other signs of competition for leadership in Asian regional organizations, notably the Sino–Japanese struggle for influence in the lead-up to the East Asian Summit of December 2005   
Intensifying competition for control of energy and other resources and disputed territory in the East China Sea   
• Active Chinese international lobbying against high-priority Japanese efforts in 2005–2006 to gain a permanent seat on the UN Security Council13   
• Strong Japanese competition with China to gain improved access to Russian oil in the Far East   
• Greater Japanese support for Taiwan at a time of stronger U.S. backing of Taiwan during the Bush administration14   
• The first significant cutbacks in Japanese aid to China since the normalization of relations in the 1970s   
• Increased Japanese willingness to deploy military forces in Asia in support of U.S. and UN initiatives   
Stepped-up Japanese efforts to improve security, aid, and/or other relations with Australia, India, and other nations on China’s southern and western flanks, including strong Japanese aid efforts for Pakistan, Afghanistan, and central Asian countries15   
• Increased Japanese efforts to solidify relations with South Korea and the United States to form a closer Japan–South Korea–U.S. alignment in reaction to China’s refusal to condemn repeated North Korean aggression against South Korea in 2010 and related Chinese truculence over its territorial claims in the Yellow Sea16

Underlying changes in Japan said to foreshadow greater Japanese–Chinese rivalry involved the following:

• A focus by strategic thinkers in the Japanese government and elsewhere in Japan on China’s rising power as the major long-term regional security concern for Japan after the collapse of the Soviet Union and the end of the Cold War.

• An increasing view by the Japanese of China as a rival for regional influence, due to China’s continued remarkable economic growth, rising political and military standing, and periodic assertiveness against Japan. A lessening of Japanese sensitivity and responsiveness to Chinese demands for special consideration on account of Japan’s negative war record in China over sixty years ago. These changes were due to the passage of time, the change in Japanese leadership generations, and Beijing’s loss of moral standing in Japan due to its crackdown after the Tiananmen incident, its nuclear testing in the 1990s, and its intimidating military actions against Taiwan and in the South China Sea.17 • A strong sense of national pride and determination among Japanese leaders and the public to preserve Japanese interests in the face of perceived efforts by officials in the People’s Republic of China (PRC) to use charges from the past and recent economic, political, and strategic issues to prompt Tokyo to give way to Chinese interests.

Meanwhile, changes in China said to be leading to greater friction with Japan included the following:

• Chinese strategists’ long-standing concerns about Japan’s impressive military capabilities, which increased as a result of U.S.–Japanese agreements from 1996 on and which to Chinese observers appeared to broaden Japan’s strategic role in eastern Asia and provide U.S. strategic support for Japanese politicians wishing to strike a military posture in the region less deferential to China than in the past.18   
Chinese concerns about stronger Japanese strategic support for the United States seen in Japanese deployments of military forces to the Indian Ocean and Iraq early in the past decade.   
Chinese government specialists’ acknowledgment of changes in Japanese attitudes toward China and the judgment that Beijing appeared likely to meet even more opposition and gain less support from Japan. The Japanese decisions to cut aid to China seemed consistent with this trend.   
Chinese nationalism became a focal point of government-sponsored media and other publicity in recent years, especially following the Tiananmen incident and the collapse of communism in Europe and the Soviet Union at the end of the Cold War. Appealing to the sense of China as having been victimized by foreign aggressors in the past, the publicity focused heavily on Japan, by far the most important foreign aggressor in modern Chinese history. Government-sponsored publicity elicited widespread positive response in China and soured the overall atmosphere of China’s relations with Japan.19

A contrasting perspective—which I favor—gave greater weight to the common interests and forces that continue to bind Sino–Japanese relations and to limit the chances of serious confrontation or conflict. Mutual interests centered on strong, growing economic and strategic interdependence between Japan and China and the influence of the United States and other third parties, including other national powers in Asia—all of whom favored and appeared ready to work to preserve Sino–Japanese stability. The argument against the development of serious Sino–Japanese confrontation involved the following elements:

• Both the Japanese and the Chinese governments remained domestically focused and continued to give top priority to the economic development of their countries, which they believed required a prolonged, peaceful, and cooperative relationship with their Asian neighbors, notably with each other.   
China depended on Japan for foreign investment and technology and as a market for Chinese goods; Japan was increasingly dependent on China as a market, source of imports, and offshore manufacturing base. Personnel exchanges between Japan and China grew markedly. Each year, tens of thousands of Japanese and Chinese students visited or studied in China and Japan. Government-sponsored exchange programs fostered interchange, and even if they did not always promote positive feelings, they probably promoted more realistic mutual perceptions. Few if any governments active in Asian affairs benefited from or sought to promote greater Sino–Japanese friction. This included the Bush administration, which was careful to balance its strong pro-Japanese slant with reaffirmation of continued interest in closer mutually beneficial relations with China designed in part to sustain regional peace and stability. Such cooperation was especially important to the United States and to China and Japan in regard to efforts to deal diplomatically with the North Korean nuclear issue and other provocations coming from Pyongyang.   
• Because the United States remained such an important military and economic power in the region, the U.S.–Japan alliance resulted in a marked asymmetry in Japanese and Chinese perceptions of competition and rivalry. While Japanese elite and popular opinion was more focused on China as a concern, Chinese elite and popular opinion was more preoccupied with the United States as a possible concern; Japan’s role was seen as secondary, the junior partner in one of the U.S. alliances and security arrangements that affected Chinese interests. Given the Chinese focus on dealing with the primary concern posed by the

United States, Chinese officials sometimes sought to avoid disputes with Japan and rather tried to woo Japan away from close alignment with the United States and toward positions more favorable to China.20 During the crisis in Sino–Japanese relations in the middle of the past decade, Chinese officials moved in an opposite direction, seeking to isolate Japan, partly by seeking U.S. understanding and support against Japanese positions and practices that China opposes. As the Japanese and Chinese governments sought to ease tensions after Prime Minister Koizumi left office in 2006, China curbed overt efforts to isolate Japan.

# Post–Cold War Relations

Broadly speaking, Sino–Japanese relations after the Cold War became troubled beginning in the middle of the 1990s. The difficulties involved territorial, strategic, and economic issues, including the following:

• Exchanges of diplomatic complaints backed by strongly worded media and other rhetoric over competing claims to islets and energy resources in the East China Sea.21 Increasingly evident signs of mutual suspicion over eastern Asian security issues. Chinese officials and commentators took a jaundiced view of Japan’s reaffirmation of its alliance relationship with the United States. Particularly after the provocative Chinese military exercises directed at Taiwan in 1995 and 1996, Japanese strategists publicly expressed concern over China’s rising power and military capabilities in the region, and the two sides differed sharply over U.S.–Japanese plans to develop a theater missile defense in eastern Asia. China saw the move as directed at countering Chinese as well as North Korean ballistic missiles. Concerns among Japanese government decision makers and other opinion leaders that China’s rising economic power, fostered in part by Japanese aid, trade, investment, and technology, might lead to the expansion of Chinese political, economic, and military influence in regional and world affairs in ways contrary to Japanese interests.22

The tensions in Japanese–Chinese relations in the mid- to late 1990s contrasted with a period of several years after the Tiananmen incident that was widely acknowledged as the most positive and cooperative period in bilateral relations since the Pacific War. Japan’s initial response to the incident was muted. Tokyo went along with Group of Seven (G7) sanctions against China. In July 1990, however, Tokyo diverged from the rest of the G7 to announce a resumption of lending to China. The Chinese government strongly supported the Japanese move, which ushered in a three-year period of cooperation and cordiality.23

A surge in Japanese investment made China Japan’s second-largest destination for direct foreign investment after the United States. Official dialogues and intergovernmental cooperation expanded, including cooperation in military and security matters. Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa declared in late 1991 that Japan’s relationship with China was as important as its relationship with the United States. A successful visit to China by the Japanese emperor in 1992 indicated just how far the two sides were willing to go in order to put the past behind them, at least for the time being. Hosokawa in 1993 was notably forthright in expressing regret for past Japanese aggression against China.24

In 1995, several difficult political and security issues surfaced. China’s nuclear testing program drew strong protests from Japan, which was followed by the freezing of a small part of Japan’s large aid program in China. Beijing responded by reminding Japan again of its record of aggression in China. The fiftieth anniversary of the end of the Pacific War was used in China as an opportunity for extensive media examination of Japan’s military past.25

In November 1995, the presidents of China and South Korea held a joint press conference in Seoul in which they criticized Japan’s alleged failure to address adequately its history of aggression. Although China and South Korea often had released statements critical of Japan in the past, such highlevel joint statements had not occurred before, as relations between China and South Korea had been normalized for only a few years. Politicians and various community leaders in Japan reacted negatively, perceiving this move as political manipulation of the history issue.26 Meanwhile, the Chinese military exercises designed to intimidate Taiwan in 1995 and 1996 alarmed many officials and opinion leaders in Japan and increased Japan’s wariness of PRC ambitions in the region.27

The mixed picture of Sino–Japanese relations after the Cold War—several “good years” followed by several years of “troubled” relations in the mid- to late 1990s—was not unusual in the modern history of Japan–China relations.28 There were similar ups and downs during previous decades. The pattern showed a bilateral relationship with deeply rooted differences that prevented full and lasting cooperation, but a relationship that was being managed without major confrontation or conflict in order to meet the needs of the two sides.29

In the early 1960s, for instance, China was stridently opposed to both the United States and the Soviet Union and sharply criticized Japan’s government as a “running $\deg ^ { \prime \prime }$ of $^ { \prime \prime } \mathrm { U } . \mathrm { S }$ . imperialism” in Asia. However, China faced a major economic crisis as a result of the withdrawal of Soviet economic and technical support in 1960 as well as the disastrous collapse of the Chinese economy during the Great Leap Forward of 1958–1961. In this context, Chinese leaders proved sufficiently pragmatic to reach a five-year economic agreement with a wide-ranging group of Japanese industries—in effect making Japan the major developed country involved in the support of China’s economy.

While continuing to trade with Japan even during the most disruptive and violent years of the Cultural Revolution in the late 1960s, Beijing strove to use its nascent opening with the Nixon administration and growing pro-PRC sentiment in Japan in order to isolate Japanese Prime Minister Eisaku Sato and his conservative Liberal Democratic Party (LDP) government over their refusal to break ties with Taiwan and establish ties with Beijing. The surprise announcement by President Nixon in July 1971 that he would visit Beijing came as a shock to Sato and undermined his policy toward China. Beijing kept up the political pressure on Japan until a new LDP prime minister was selected. The new prime minister quickly normalized relations on terms agreeable to the PRC in 1972, ushering in a period of Sino–Japanese cooperation.

As post-Mao China developed an “open-door” foreign economic policy in the late 1970s, Japan loomed large in China’s development calculus. Japan was China’s largest trading partner. Aid relations grew rapidly, and by 1982 China was the largest recipient of official Japanese development assistance. Nonetheless, Chinese discontent grew in the 1980s over what Chinese officials and opinion leaders perceived as asymmetry in the economic relationship. For example, China sold Japan coal, oil, and raw materials, and Japan sold China higher-value-added machinery, automobiles, and other equipment. Japanese business and government representatives eschewed large-scale direct investment in China; Japan also shared less technology with China than with some other developing countries. This seeming imbalance in economic benefits, combined with Chinese irritation over Japan’s refusal to take what Beijing saw as an appropriately contrite posture regarding its negative war record in China, led to sharp criticisms and demonstrations against Japan by students, opinion leaders, and some officials. Both governments moved to minimize the disputes, with Japan notably stepping up its aid efforts in China.

# China–Japan Differences

Strategic Issues

Many of the important differences that emerged in post–Cold War Sino– Japanese relations were related to changed views on security concerns by officials, other elites, and popular opinion, especially in Japan. During the later years of the Cold War, Japan and China were preoccupied with the military dangers posed by the Soviet Union. This common threat helped reduce the salience of security and other strategic differences between the two powers. Thus, though Chinese elite and popular opinion often showed angst over alleged Japanese militarism, Chinese leaders generally supported Japan’s military efforts to offset Soviet power in eastern Asia. Beijing also generally supported a strong U.S.–Japan security relationship aimed at countering the Soviet Union; China sometimes characterized this as part of an international “antihegemony front” directed at Moscow. Japanese leaders for their part soft-pedaled reservations they had over China’s missile developments, nuclear weapons programs, and other defense preparations that were targeted against the Soviet Union but had implications for Japan’s security.30

The collapse of the Soviet Union lowered the tide of Sino–Japanese strategic cooperation, exposing the rocks of security and strategic differences. The end of the Cold War and collapse of the Soviet Union altered Japan’s threat environment. It dismantled the Cold War strategic framework for eastern Asia; removed Japan’s number one security threat, against which Japan’s force structure was configured; and took away the initial rationale for Japan’s post–World War II geostrategic bargain with the United States.

Japanese leaders came to view the strategic situation in eastern Asia as more unsettled than during the Cold War, with a number of near-term flash points, notably North Korea and Taiwan, and longer-term uncertainties, many centered on China.31 Japanese concerns regarding a possible North Korean attack on Japan and possible negative implications of unification of the Korean peninsula both involved China in indirect but important ways. More significant was Taiwan. An outbreak of hostilities in the Taiwan Strait involving U.S. forces would draw Japan in under the U.S.-Japan Defense Treaty and U.S.-Japan Defense Guidelines. The extent and role of Japanese involvement in a China–Taiwan–U.S. military conflict would require difficult decisions of Japan as it weighed the need to support its ally against the costs such actions would entail for its future relationship with China.32 The direction that U.S. security policy would take remained a key question for Japan.33 Until the 1990s, Japanese policymakers were confident that the United States needed Japan and that the alliance was just as critical for Washington’s security strategy as it was for Tokyo’s.34 This confidence waned during the Clinton administration, with Japan unsure of its value to the United States, while China’s importance for the United States seemed to rise.35

In thinking about China as a concern for Japanese policy, Japanese strategists for several years gave primacy to worries about possible social instability and political paralysis in China in the immediate aftermath of the Tiananmen crackdown in China and the collapse of the Soviet empire. Beijing’s subsequent rapid economic growth, continued political stability, and more assertive military and foreign policies shifted Japanese concerns more toward dealing with the multifaceted consequences of the rise of a power of China’s size. In particular, Japanese officials and other strategists became more concerned with Beijing’s nuclear weapons testing and development; increased airpower and naval power abilities; and periodic assertions, backed by military force, concerning sovereignty and territorial disputes with Taiwan and other neighbors, including Japan. Incidents included Japanese discovery of a Chinese submarine attempting to secretly penetrate Japanese territorial waters and repeated episodes of Chinese military survey ships endeavoring to map waters near Japan.36

In China, concern focused on Japan’s cooperation with the United States in strengthening the U.S.–Japan alliance. Those Chinese commentators and officials who in the 1990s and later saw the United States as determined to hold back or contain China’s rising influence in eastern Asia suggested that the United States was using the alliance with Japan toward this end. They charged that Japan was a willing accomplice because Tokyo feared that China’s rising influence would come at its expense.37

The closer U.S.–Japan security cooperation during the George W. Bush– Koizumi administrations saw a number of developments of particular concern to Chinese officials. One was a more active U.S.–Japanese dialogue over the situation in the Taiwan Strait. Another was the emergence of a formal U.S.–Japan–Australian strategic dialogue—establishing a broader web of U.S.-led alliance relationships in Asia that excluded China. Third were the Japanese military deployments in the Indian Ocean and other military measures to support the U.S.-led wars in Afghanistan and Iraq, which raised concerns in some quarters in China about the implications of strengthened U.S.–Japanese military cooperation in areas around China’s periphery. Subsequently, the strengthening of the Obama administration’s support for Japan and other Asia-Pacific allies and associates, alarmed by assertive China’s positions over nearby territorial disputes in 2009 and 2010, was criticized in China as efforts to impede China’s rise and “contain” China.38

# History Issues

Japan’s aggression against China in the seventy years prior to Japan’s defeat in World War II remained a potent issue in mainland China.39 The concerns of Chinese strategists and opinion leaders, as well as broader Chinese public opinion, about a possible revival of Japanese military expansion or more general Japanese untrustworthiness were strong. This was partly due to the fact that Japanese aggression against China was far more severe than that of any other power and the fact that Chinese government–supported media and other outlets repeatedly used accusations of Japanese militarism as a way to build nationalistic feeling in China, to put the Japanese government on the defensive, and to elicit concessions from the Japanese government in the form of aid, trading terms, or other benefits. As China loomed larger and more influential in Asian and world affairs at the start of the twenty-first century, Chinese officials and opinion leaders tended to see the military threat from Japan posed less by Japan taking independent action and more by Japan’s ever closer defense cooperation with the United States and possibly closer ties with Taiwan.

For their part, Japanese officials sometimes exacerbated bilateral difficulties by denying the facts of history or equivocating on Japan’s aggression against China up to the end of World War II. While many in Japan felt genuine regret about the war, repeated reminders from China seemed particularly self-serving and undermined positive feelings toward the PRC regime, which had already lost considerable support in Japan because of its human rights record, weapons proliferation, and assertive nationalistic policies in the post–Cold War period. Meanwhile, some Japanese commentators reflected much broader suspicions of elite and public opinion when they speculated that Beijing strove to use its rising economic, political, and military influence to exert a dominant influence in eastern Asia, placing Japan in a subservient position similar to the one that it held in the historical order in eastern Asia throughout most of the 2,000-year history of the Chinese Empire.40

# Territorial Issues

Sino–Japanese tensions over territorial disputes involved islets in the East China Sea and claims to East China Sea resources, notably natural gas. Eight islets known as the Diaoyu Islands (in Chinese) or the Senkaku Islands (in Japanese) were uninhabited, but they occupied an important strategic location, and the region around them was considered highly prospective for gas and oil resources. The roots of the dispute went back to the nineteenth century. Japan had defeated China in a war and took control of Taiwan in 1895. Following Japan’s defeat in World War II, Taiwan was returned to China. But the islets remained under U.S. control. Japan’s claim to the islets appeared strengthened when the United States returned them to Tokyo’s control along with nearby Okinawa in 1971. Subsequently, the U.S. government at times endeavored to keep from taking sides in the dispute.

In the 1970s, Tokyo and Beijing agreed to put the disputed islets issue aside as they normalized diplomatic relations and signed a peace treaty addressing issues stemming from World War II. Japanese rightists built a makeshift lighthouse on one of the islets in 1978. The Japanese coast guard patrolled near the islets and fended off efforts by fishermen and others from Taiwan, Hong Kong, and elsewhere to assert claims to the islets. In February 1992, Beijing passed a law reaffirming China’s territorial claims to the islets. The Japanese government promptly protested Beijing’s sovereignty law, while it also subsequently reasserted its claim to the islets.41 Renewed activities by Japanese rightists on the islets in mid-1996 precipitated a period of Sino–Japanese tension over competing territorial claims.

Subsequently, periodic tensions involving fishing and other intrusions, surveillance by government ships and aircraft, and diplomatic protests alternated with times of relaxation of tensions. A spike in Chinese–Japan friction coincided with assertive Chinese territorial claims, sometimes backed by military patrols, around its periphery in 2009–2010. Japan’s arrest in September 2010 of a Chinese fishing boat captain whose ship was videotaped ramming Japanese coast guard vessels near the Diaoyu/Senkaku Islands precipitated a standoff between the two governments that went on for two weeks, until Japan gave in to Chinese pressure and released the captain. Meanwhile, amid intensifying competition among China, Japan, and other major consumers for international energy resources in recent years, Japan sharply disputed China’s actions, beginning in 2004, involving taking natural gas from East China Sea areas that Japan also claimed. Japanese officials also disputed China’s challenge of the scope of the Japanese exclusive economic zone east of the main islands of Japan.42

# Economic Issues

Economic relations between the two countries were troubled on several occasions despite Japan’s status as one of China’s leading trading partners, source of economic assistance, and source of direct foreign investment. China’s economic vibrancy after the Cold War also led Japanese manufacturers and other businesses to highly value China as a platform for production destined for Japanese and foreign markets and as an economic market of large potential for Japanese goods and services. China sometimes resisted perceived inequities in the bilateral economic relationship. Alleged efforts by Japanese government–backed companies to dominate key sectors of China’s market were an important focal point for anti-Japanese demonstrations in Chinese cities in the mid-1980s.43

More recent developments reflected a shift in the bilateral economic relationship, as China became a more important partner for Japan than Japan was for China and as China continued rapid growth while Japan had little growth. In this context, Japan altered the level and scope of its aid program in China to focus on areas that offered less challenge to Japanese industry and were more compatible with other Japanese interests (for example, the environment). Japan moved gradually to phase out the aid program. In addition, Tokyo did not budge in the face of Chinese complaints in the 1990s that the combination of the requirement that they repay Japanese loans in yen and the large rise in the value of the yen in relation to the U.S. dollar and China’s currency over the previous decade put a heavy additional burden on

China’s economic development. Meanwhile, Japanese companies remained reluctant to share their most advanced technology with China, fearing that the technology would be used to compete with Japanese producers. China’s restrictions on so-called rare earths exports to Japan, which were very important to Japanese manufacturers, came during a period of tense relations over territorial issues in 2010. The Chinese action alarmed Japanese leaders that the Chinese administration would use growing Japanese economic dependence on China to compel Japanese subservience to China.44

Goods produced in China (often by Japanese companies) for Japanese consumers posed serious competition for the producers of similar products in Japan. Japanese opinion leaders and the public often showed alarm over the “hollowing out” of Japanese industries, farms, and enterprises that were no longer able to compete with China-based producers. Some favored protectionist trade measures against China, though such measures were inconsistent with the international trade regimes supported by the Japanese government and business leaders, who continued to work more closely with China in order to achieve the advantages of economic scale needed to keep Japanese firms competitive in the international economy.45

# Domestic Politics

The domestic politics of China and Japan manifested trends of growing national assertiveness and pride that spread throughout eastern Asia in the post–Cold War period.46 Government-sponsored nationalism in China coincided with rising nationalistic sentiment in Japan, notably over territorial disputes, trade issues, and prominence in the United Nations and international organizations. As a result, compromise on sensitive issues in Japan–China relations became more difficult.47

# Mutual Interests in Japan–China Relations

Both the Japanese and the Chinese governments continued to give top priority to the economic development of their countries, which they each believed required a peaceful and cooperative relationship with the other. The two economies were becoming increasingly interdependent. Japan was China’s top trading partner from 1993 to 2002. China became even more important for Japan as it surpassed the United States in 2008 to become the largest market for Japan’s exports. Japan–China trade was valued at $\$ 302$ billion in 2010, and projections suggested that trade links would be increasingly important for both sides. Regarding foreign investment in China, Japan was in the top ranks along with the United States. Japanese companies’ investments were valued at $\$ 7.68$ billion in China in 2010; China was the second-largest investment destination for Japanese firms after the United States. Japan’s aid had been the most important in China a decade ago, but it declined in importance in recent years.48

Personal exchanges between Japan and China grew. Following the inauguration of the post-Mao reforms, hundreds of thousands of Chinese students traveled and studied in Japan. Japanese students visiting or studying in China numbered 20,000 in the mid-1990s. The number of Japanese students in China in 2004 was over 19,000. The number declined modestly later in the decade. Numerous exchange programs—many fostered by the governments—worked to build mutual understanding and improve relations.49

No other government involved in eastern Asian affairs appeared likely to benefit from or be inclined to promote greater Sino–Japanese friction. The United States was determined to maintain regional stability and to solidify U.S. relations with Japan while seeking improved relations with China. Russia improved its relations with China markedly in the post–Cold War period; its relations with Japan remained complicated by territorial disputes and economic incompatibilities, but both sides generally favored regional stability and development.

In Southeast Asia, ASEAN sought to reduce tensions and build mutual trust in the region through political dialogue between ASEAN and Chinese, Japanese, and other leaders or through Asia-Pacific nations meeting in groups such as the ASEAN Regional Forum, which dealt with regional security questions. In dealing with the two powers to the north, ASEAN welcomed different paths. It cooperated closely with various economic and other initiatives in the ASEAN Plus Three (ASEAN plus Japan, China, and South Korea) framework that featured annual summits involving leaders of the thirteen states, and it also worked to develop separate free trade arrangements offered by China and Japan as well as the United States and other economic partners that appeared to some to be competitive, as various powers maneuvered for greater influence in Southeast Asia.50

Some observers suggested that Taiwan would benefit in its competition with the PRC by a growing split between Japan and China. Indeed, some of Taiwan’s leaders emphasized the utility of Taiwan linking its security more closely with the U.S.–Japan alliance and enhanced security cooperation with Japan. However, this line of reasoning declined as the administration of President Ma Ying-jeou gave top priority to constructive engagement with China.51

At times, South Korea was not averse to lining up with Beijing to criticize Japan’s war record or to work in parallel with China in criticizing Japan’s expanded military role in Asian affairs. Privately, South Korean officials also showed some interest in using improved relations with China to balance South Korea’s strong dependence on the United States and Japan for security and economic-technological support, respectively. Such manipulation was seen to work well in a peaceful atmosphere, but increased PRC–Japan tensions also were seen to complicate the regional military and economic stability that was so important to South Korea’s development. Moreover, South Korea’s president, Kim Dae Jung, appeared to put such manipulation aside as he and Japanese leaders reached some rapport during summit meetings in the late 1990s and early 2000s. His successor, President Roh Moo-Hyun (2003–2008), was more outspoken against Japan, notably voicing strong opposition, along with China, to visits of the Japanese prime minister to the controversial Yasukuni war memorial. President Lee Myungbak (2008 to present) endeavored to improve relations with Japan and avoided moves toward China adverse to Japanese interests.52

The North Korean administration of Kim Jong Il generally was less concerned with economic development and was preoccupied with survival. It was hard to see what benefit Pyongyang would derive from exacerbated Sino–Japanese tensions. There was perhaps some benefit in keeping Beijing and Tokyo from cooperating with the United States to pressure North Korea to agree to verifiable nuclear safeguards. Pyongyang’s options to do so appeared limited, as its actions were closely scrutinized by all concerned regional powers for signs of efforts to provoke instability or, alternatively, signs that North Korea was more prepared to come to terms with its neighbors. It appeared under prevailing circumstances that North Korea’s ability to exacerbate China–Japan tensions without having a major effect on overall regional stability was weak.53

# Recent Developments

The Asian economic crisis of 1997–1998 added to the already strong preoccupation of leaders in Tokyo and Beijing with their respective domestic problems, especially economic problems. At least for the time being, neither government sought to exacerbate tensions over the array of issues that continued to divide them. Thus, they went ahead with senior leaders’ meetings in Tokyo and Beijing, capped by President Jiang Zemin’s November 1998 visit to Japan. That visit saw Japanese officials stand firm in the face of Chinese pressure on issues related to Taiwan and the history of China–Japan relations. Chinese leaders adjusted their approach, as leaders in both capitals endeavored to emphasize the positive and give less public attention to important and often deeply rooted differences that remained unresolved.54

While he emphasized Sino–Japanese economic and other compatible interests, Japanese Prime Minister Koizumi tested Chinese tolerance on the sensitive history issue with his repeated visits to the Yasukuni Shrine— which included commemoration of Japanese leaders during the Pacific

War who were later convicted as war criminals. After his third visit despite Chinese admonitions, Chinese officials made it known in 2003 that the Japanese prime minister would not be welcome in Beijing, but they were flexible in arranging a meeting between the Japanese prime minister and China’s recently installed President Hu Jintao at the sidelines of an international summit in Europe in mid-2003. In 2004 and 2005, there were several subsequent meetings between Koizumi and top Chinese government leaders, but none in Beijing. By late 2005, however, senior Chinese leaders seemed unwilling to meet the Japanese prime minister under any circumstances because of his continued visits to the controversial war memorial.

At that time, the burgeoning crisis over North Korea’s nuclear weapons program and the danger that tensions on the Korean peninsula might escalate and result in military confrontation and war caused Chinese and Japanese leaders to work with the United States and others to deal with the crisis through diplomatic means. At bottom, the North Korean nuclear challenge posed an added preoccupation for Chinese and Japanese leaders that at least over the short term reduced the likelihood that they would adopt more assertive and potentially disruptive policies toward one another. They presumably were loath to appear to worsen an already delicate situation in ways that could adversely affect their interests in stability, development, and security.55

Nevertheless, a sharp turn for the worse in China–Japan relations seen during the violent anti-Japanese demonstrations in China during April 2005 was marked by concurrent deterioration of relations regarding political and security issues on several fronts, even as economic relations prospered. Several events preceded the 2005 demonstrations, and later developments exacerbated tensions. Prime Minister Koizumi remained unapologetic about visiting the Yasukuni Shrine.56 Another textbook seen to whitewash Japanese aggression prior to 1945 was approved for publication by Japanese government officials. First China and then Japan engaged in exploitation of gas in disputed waters in the East China Sea. Russia vacillated between strong incentives from Japan and China in determining whether to favor one or the other in building a pipeline to eastern Asia for Siberian oil. Repeated intrusions into Japanese-claimed waters by Chinese “research” and other ships presaged the intrusion of a Chinese nuclear-powered submarine that was found and tracked by Japanese forces in Japanese territorial waters near Okinawa. Growing Japanese concern about the implications for Japanese interests posed by the rapid Chinese military buildup focused on Taiwan elicited more explicit Japanese government expressions of concern and a variety of countermeasures, many involving strengthening Japan’s alliance relationship with the United States. In this context, Japan engaged in bilateral consultations with the United States over the Taiwan situation, worked in a trilateral forum with Australia and the United States that dealt with Taiwan and other Asian issues, was explicit in noting Japanese government concerns over the Taiwan situation, and backed the United States in seeking curbs on European and Israeli arms sales to China.57 A large Chinese–Russian military exercise involving naval and air forces in the East China Sea in August 2005 was followed by Japan’s detection in September of a flotilla of Chinese warships sailing near a Chinese gas rig that was exploiting resources in the East China Sea that were claimed by Japan.58

Japan’s impressive aid and relief efforts after the tsunami disaster in southern Asia in December 2004 led to an increase in Japan’s international profile. Japanese leaders used this enhanced profile to launch a series of high-level international visits and associated economic and other gestures in an effort to garner support for a permanent seat for Japan on the UN Security Council. Despite strenuous government efforts, China remained in the second echelon among tsunami relief donors. The Chinese government opposed Japan’s UN bid. Public opinion in China was negative. In these circumstances, whether by design or happenstance, tens of thousands of Chinese responded to an Internet campaign against Japan’s UN bid by taking to the streets in April 2005, with many attacking Japanese businesses and diplomatic properties. For several days, the Chinese police attempted to regulate but did not attempt to stop the violent anti-Japanese acts, bringing bilateral relations to the lowest point since the normalization of relations in 1972.59

Subsequently, government officials on both sides endeavored to restore order and maintain mutually advantageous business ties. However, neither side gave ground on the various political and security disputes that had given rise to the recent deterioration of relations.60 Fresh from his success in leading his party to a decisive victory in the diet election in September 2005, Prime Minister Koizumi again visited the Yasukuni Shrine in October, prompting shrill Chinese protests and a cancellation of foreign minister talks to improve relations.61

The wide range of recent Sino–Japanese differences made it hard to be optimistic about future Sino–Japanese relations. Nonetheless, forces working against further deterioration of relations and encouraging more businesslike Sino–Japanese relations remained strong and appeared powerful enough to keep tensions within bounds and avoid strident rivalry or military conflict. The weak Liberal Democratic Party governments that followed Koizumi’s departure from office in 2006 were welcomed by China. The Democratic Justice Party administrations that followed in 2009 also received cordial receptions. Nonetheless, salient differences over fishing, territorial disputes, and trade in so-called rare earths important to Japanese manufacturing brought relations to another low point in late 2010. The pattern of simmering tensions and suspicion along with a need for avoiding major confrontation and conflict continued.62

# RELATIONS WITH THE KOREAN PENINSULA

With the collapse of the Soviet Union and the demise of East–West and Sino–Soviet competition for influence in the Korean peninsula after the Cold War, Beijing adjusted Chinese relations to take advantage of economic and other opportunities with South Korea while sustaining a leading international position in relations with North Korea. The international confrontation caused by North Korea’s nuclear weapons program and related ballistic missile programs and the sharp decline in economic conditions and the rise of political uncertainty there following the sudden death of Kim Il Sung in 1994 raised uncertainties in China about the future stability of the peninsula. In general, Chinese officials used economic aid and continued military and political exchanges to help stabilize and preserve Chinese relations with the North, while working closely with South Korea and at times the United States in seeking a peaceful resolution to tensions on the peninsula. In response to the crisis created by North Korea’s provocative nuclear proliferation activities beginning in 2002, China was even more active, taking a leading role in international efforts to seek a diplomatic solution that would preserve China’s influence and interests in stability on the peninsula.63

Foreign observers often judged that China had a longer-term interest in seeing a growth of Chinese influence and a reduction of U.S. and Japanese influence on the peninsula.64 However, Beijing generally was careful not to be seen directly challenging U.S. leadership in Korean affairs. It apparently judged that Chinese interests were best met with a broadly accommodating posture that allowed for concurrent improvements in China’s relations with South Korea and effective management of China’s sometimes difficult relations with North Korea. Striking the right balance between sometimes conflicting Chinese objectives in relations with North and South Korea, without alienating the United States, has proven to be difficult, especially in the recent period of unsteady North Korean leadership succession accompanied by egregious North Korean nuclear proliferation and military aggression. The result up to the middle of the past decade was a marked increase in China’s relations with South Korea and continued Chinese relations with North Korea closer than any other power, without negatively affecting Beijing’s relations with the United States. More recent developments have led to a significant step backward in Chinese relations with South Korea and the United States.

# Relations with South Korea

China steadily improved relations with South Korea, reaching a high point in the middle of the past decade. The Chinese advances coincided with the most serious friction in U.S.–South Korean relations since the Korean War. Adding to China’s importance to South Korea was U.S. policy toward North Korea during much of the past decade. The Bush administration worked closely with China to facilitate international talks on North Korea’s nuclear weapons program. North Korea preferred to deal directly with the United States on this issue. While such bilateral interchange with North Korea presumably would have boosted U.S. influence relative to that of China in peninsula affairs, the Bush government for some time saw such U.S.–North Korean contacts as counterproductive for U.S. interests in securing a verifiable end to North Korea’s nuclear weapons program. As a result, China saw its influence grow in the eyes of South Korea and other concerned powers as it joined with the United States in the multilateral efforts, notably the six-party talks involving Japan and Russia along with the two Koreas, the United States, and China, to deal with the North Korean nuclear weapons issue on the one hand while sustaining its position as the foreign power having the closest relationship with the reclusive North Korean regime on the other.65

Against this background, widespread predictions that China would supersede the United States in relations with South Korea proved to be wrong. The latter part of the decade saw serious frictions in South Korean–Chinese relations and shifts in South Korean opinion against China. South Korean and U.S. leaders strengthened efforts to shore up their alliance relationship in order to safeguard their important respective interests in the face of North Korean threats, rising China, and other uncertainties in northeastern Asia.66

The upswing in Chinese–South Korean relations saw China become South Korea’s leading trade partner. Trade was valued at $\$ 171$ billion in 2010. South Korea sent a quarter of its exports to China. China was the recipient of the largest amount of South Korean foreign investment (totaling $\$ 30$ billion in 2010). After South Korean efforts to stabilize South Korea’s currency with the help of a $\$ 30$ billion line of credit from the U.S. Federal Reserve in October 2008, China joined Japan in December in pledging its own $\$ 30$ billion currency swap with South Korea. China was the most important foreign destination for South Korean tourists and students. In the face of the Bush administration’s tough stance toward North Korea in 2001–2006, South Korea and China were close and like-minded partners in dealing more moderately than the United States with issues posed by North Korea’s nuclear weapons program and related provocations.67

As relations developed, China’s economic importance for South Korea was seen in both negative and positive ways. Periodic trade disputes came with growing concerns by South Korean manufacturers, political leaders, and public opinion about competition from fast-advancing Chinese enterprises. China’s economic attractiveness to South Korean consumers declined markedly as a result of repeated episodes of Chinese exports of tainted consumer products to South Korean and other markets. South Korean leaders strove to break out of close dependence on economic ties with China through free trade agreements and other arrangements with the United States, Japan, and the European Union that would ensure inputs of foreign investment and technology needed for South Korea to stay ahead of Chinese competitors.68

Other differences between the two countries focused on competing Chinese and Korean claims regarding the scope and importance of the historical Goguryeo kingdom, China’s rejection of international pressure in response to North Korean aggression against South Korea, longer-term Chinese ambitions in North Korea, and Chinese treatment of North Korean refugees in China and of South Koreans endeavoring to assist them there. The disputes had a strong impact on nationalistic South Korean political leaders and public opinion. Public opinion polls in recent years showed a significant decline in South Korean views of China and its policies and practices.69

# Converging PRC–South Korean Foreign Policy Interests, 1992–2004

Converging South Korean–Chinese foreign policy interests supported economic and other trends to greatly enhance China’s position in South Korea up to the middle of the last decade. By the early 2000s, China enjoyed a much more positive image than the United States in South Korean elite and public opinion. South Korean government officials also welcomed the improved ties with China as a means to diversify South Korean foreign policy options, reduce dependency on the U.S. alliance, secure South Korean interests on the Korean peninsula, and enhance South Korea’s economic development.

South Korean motives for good relations with China often included foreign policy concerns. At times in the 1990s and later, South Korean officials viewed better relations with China as a useful way to preclude possible Chinese expansion or pressure against South Korea as China grew in wealth and power during the twenty-first century. They also saw good relations with China as providing protection against possible pressure from Japan in the future.70 Officials in Seoul were careful to add that relations with China also broadened South Korean foreign policy options, allowing South Korea to appear to break out of the constraints imposed by what they saw as a U.S.-centered foreign policy since the 1950s. South Korean opinion leaders judged that with better relations with China, Seoul could afford to be more assertive and less accommodating in relations with the United States—although South Korean officials and scholars also often asserted that relations with China or other foreign policy options provided no substitute for the essential South Korean alliance relationship with the United States.71

Meanwhile, given continued difficulties in U.S.–China relations in the 1990s, South Korean officials sometimes expressed an interest in acting as a mediator between these two powers, both of which had friendly ties with Seoul. The position as mediator would have boosted South Korea’s international stature. South Korean officials also asserted that South Korea wanted to avoid a situation where it might have to choose between Washington and Beijing if U.S.–Chinese tensions in Asia were to rise sharply.

According to South Korean experts, China also viewed good relations with Seoul as a possible hedge against Japanese power, although Chinese officials emphasized that their interests were focused on regional peace and stability and on setting a good example in relations with a smaller neighbor, South Korea, in order to reassure China’s other neighbors about Beijing’s foreign policy intentions. More broadly, Chinese intentions were said by some South Korean experts to reflect a desire to use better relations with South Korea against perceived U.S. efforts to contain or hold back China’s growing power and influence in Asian and world affairs. In particular, Chinese specialists and officials voiced concern from time to time that the United States might use its alliance relationships with Japan and South Korea in order to check or build a barrier against the allegedly expanding “China threat” in Northeast Asia. Closer China–South Korean relations would complicate any such U.S. strategic scheme.72

In this context, South Korea and China markedly increased cooperation in Asian regional groups.73 China’s greater willingness in the 1990s and 2000s to cooperate more closely with and play a more active role in Asian multilateral organizations assisted this trend. Previously, Chinese officials had viewed Asian multilateral groups with more wariness and skepticism. Thus, China’s greater willingness to cooperate with South Korea and others in the economic deliberations of Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) and in the security-related interchanges in the ASEAN Regional Forum enhanced Chinese–South Korean relations.

The two powers also participated actively in regional forums that excluded the United States. Both South Korea and China played significant roles in the biannual Asia-Europe Meetings initiated in 1996 to encourage greater cooperation between eastern Asia and the developed countries of Europe—in part as a counterweight to the U.S.-led APEC. The Asian economic crisis of 1997 prompted stronger regional cooperation efforts led by South Korea and China under the ASEAN Plus Three rubric. This group became a leading regional grouping in eastern Asia, with frequent meetings of senior ministers and state leaders that occasioned major economic and some political and security initiatives, notably proposals by China, South Korea, Japan, and others for free trade agreements in the region and security plans dealing with eastern Asia.

These actions reflected strong interest in China and South Korea in deepening intraregional cooperation, first in economic areas but then in political and security areas, in order to ease long-standing mutual suspicions among eastern Asian states and enhance prospects for peace and development in the region.74 China’s public stance focused on its new security concept (NSC), announced in 1997. The NSC was a reworking of the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence, which were the mainstay of moderate and accommodating phases in Chinese foreign policy for fifty years. The NSC was well received in South Korea and along with other Chinese policies and behavior provided a vague but sufficient basis for many in South Korea and elsewhere in Asia to deal with China’s rising power and influence in constructive ways.

When the NSC was initially proposed, Chinese foreign policy was strongly critical of and endeavored to reduce the influence of the United States and its foreign policies. Chinese officials repeatedly used the NSC to counter the U.S.- favored alliance structure in Asian and world affairs. Following the moderate turn in China’s public posture toward the United States in 2001, Chinese officials and commentary generally avoided calling on South Koreans or other Asians to choose between China’s NSC and the previously emphasized “Cold War thinking” and “power politics” exemplified by the U.S. insistence on maintaining and strengthening U.S.-led alliance structures in Asia and elsewhere. This more positive Chinese approach, which Chinese officials said would lead to a “win-win” situation in Asia for all concerned powers, including the United States, South Korea, and China, was well received in South Korea and helped strengthen Sino–South Korean relations.

# Cooling in South Korea–China Relations

South Korean popular and elite opinion toward China showed a tendency to be volatile. A positive “China fever” reached a high point in South Korea in mid-2004 and subsided.75 Significant differences emerged that increased South Korean public and elite wariness about China’s rise and strengthened South Korean interest in preserving a close alliance relationship with the United States. These developments occurred for several reasons:

• South Koreans reacted negatively to continued disputes with China about Korean claims regarding the historical Goguryeo kingdom.

• Territorial disputes between Korea and China over the so-called Gando region emerged, while differences continued to fester over trade and refugee disputes.

• China’s economic influence in North Korea increased (over half of North Korea’s cross-border trade in 2009 was with China; Chinese investment in 2008 was valued at $\$ 41$ million). The Chinese economic role surpassed that of South Korea and appeared to many in South Korea to compromise and complicate South Korean efforts to use a gradual asymmetrical engagement policy to facilitate reunification of Korea under South Korea’s leadership. Chinese economic engagement and support of North Korea was seen as designed to perpetuate the North Korean state and the prevailing division on the Korean peninsula.76

South Korean government officials generally remained focused on seeking an advantageous position for their government and country in the prevailing fluid international situation surrounding the Korean peninsula.77 While Seoul moved closer to China on a variety of economic, political, and other issues, it had few illusions about Chinese objectives. South Korean officials saw China using improved relations with South Korea in part to compete with the United States and Japan, among others, for influence in the Korean peninsula and northeastern Asia and to preclude the United States and Japan from working closely with South Korea to pressure China.

As a result, South Korea continued to try to avoid a situation where it might have to choose between Washington and Tokyo on one side and Beijing on the other if U.S.–Japanese–Chinese tensions in Asia were to rise. Reflecting ongoing angst by South Korean government officials seeking to preserve a proper balance in maintaining the alliance with the United States while improving relations with China, these officials continued to emphasize that the U.S.–South Korea alliance should allow for positive U.S. and South Korean relations with China and should avoid friction with China. Against this background, South Korean officials remained unwilling to follow the United States in pursuing policies that China opposed. South Korea also continued to be reluctant to agree to allow U.S. forces in South Korea to be deployed to other areas in eastern Asia, in part because those forces might be deployed to the Taiwan area in the event of a U.S.–China military confrontation in the Taiwan Strait.78

From 2004, however, South Korean officials also endeavored to improve relations with the United States and thereby sought to preserve an advantageous balance in South Korea’s relations with the United States, along with other powers, while pursuing closer ties with China. Thus, they played down past rhetoric that was opposed by many in the United States and supported by the Chinese government that emphasized South Korea’s role as a “balancer” between the United States and China and Japan and China.

They undertook important sacrifices, notably sending 3,000 combat troops to Iraq—a move opposed by most of the legislature and South Korean public opinion—in order to strengthen the alliance with the United States. They agreed to various high-level dialogues with U.S. officials in order to deal effectively with alliance issues, and they took the risk of pushing for a bilateral free trade agreement with the United States that if enacted would be sure to alienate many South Korean constituents. (The agreement was reached in April 2007 but had to be approved by both governments.) And they modified their past reluctance to join the U.S.-supported Proliferation Security Initiative (PSI) and attended a PSI exercise as an observer.79

These steps accompanied South Korean efforts to sustain a working relationship with Japan despite differences over territorial and historical issues and South Korea’s independent approaches to Russia, the European Union, and others. South Korean officials were privately explicit that these measures helped ensure, among other things, that South Korea would maintain its ambitions for a greater international role and would not come under the dominant sway of neighboring and growing China.

The equilibrium in South Korea’s posture toward China, the United States, Japan, and others shifted further with the coming to power of the Lee Myung-bak government in 2008. The special envoys selected by the president to visit the three powers showed lower priority for China. The close personal relationship Lee established with President Bush and later with President Obama was not duplicated by the more businesslike relationship with Chinese President Hu Jintao. South Korea clearly wanted closer cooperation with Washington, Tokyo, and Beijing, but the priority seemed to have changed in favor of the United States. The adjustment reinforced signs of a broader wariness of Chinese policies and practices on the part of various elites and South Korean public opinion and a desire to solidify the South Korea–U.S. alliance for the uncertain period ahead.80

# Relations with North Korea—Seeking Stability and Influence

American and South Korean officials and commentators were surprised and angered by China’s refusal to condemn North Korea’s recent military provocations: the sinking in March 2010 of the South Korean warship Cheonan, killing forty-six South Korean sailors; and the artillery attack on South Korea’s Yeonpyeong Island in November 2010, killing some South Korean soldiers and civilians. China’s deepening leadership ties and growing economic relations with and support for Pyongyang during a period of leadership transition in North Korea also appeared to enable North Korea’s egregious nuclear proliferation, despite United Nations sanctions and international pressures in place since the North Korean nuclear tests of 2006 and 2009. Pyongyang’s disclosure in November 2010 of what appeared to be a fully operational uranium enrichment facility, a major step forward in North Korea’s nuclear proliferation, came following China’s months-long block of the release of a report by UN experts charging North Korea with supplying nuclear technology to Syria, Iran, and Myanmar.81

At one level, the Chinese behavior and actions can be explained as the latest episodes in China’s often twisted relations with North Korea since the end of the Cold War. The record shows China repeatedly put in a reactive position as it was compelled to deal with crises caused by North Korea’s nuclear weapons development, often abrupt and disruptive swings in North Korea’s posture toward its neighbors and the United States, and economic crises and leadership transition in Pyongyang. U.S. policy toward North Korea and that of South Korea also have changed markedly over time, forcing adjustments in Chinese policies and practices.82

The stakes for China have been high. With the possible exception of Taiwan, there is no more important area around China’s periphery for Chinese domestic and foreign policy interests than the Korean peninsula. The stakes grew with rising Chinese equities in improving relations with South Korea, and often intense U.S. and other regional and international involvement to curb North Korea’s advancing nuclear weapons development.

China’s frustration with North Korea followed its nuclear weapons tests in 2006 and 2009 and other provocations.83 The North Korean actions brought a halt to the six-party talks, which were promoted by China as the main diplomatic means to deal with North Korea’s nuclear proliferation and its impact on the Korean peninsula. Contrary to past practice, the Chinese administration allowed a public debate where relations with North Korea often were depicted as a liability for China, requiring serious readjustment in Chinese policy. Nevertheless, the overall record of Chinese policy and practice showed continuing caution; China has endeavored to preserve important Chinese interests in stability on the Korean peninsula through judicious moves that strike an appropriate balance among varied Chinese relations with concerned parties at home and abroad. China has remained wary that North Korea, the United States, and others could shift course, forcing further Chinese adjustments in response.

Chinese leaders recognize that their cautious policies have failed to halt North Korea’s nuclear weapons development. They probably judge that they will be living with a nuclear North Korea for some time to come, even as they emphasize continued diplomatic efforts to reverse North Korea’s nuclear weapons development and create a nuclear-free peninsula. They appear resigned to joining with U.S. and other leaders in what is characterized as “failure management,” as far as North Korean nuclear weapons development is concerned.84 They endeavor to preserve stability and Chinese equities with concerned powers. As in the recent past, they continue to avoid pressure or other risky initiatives on their own, waiting for the actions of others or changed circumstances that would increase the prospects of curbing North Korea’s nuclear challenge and allow for stronger Chinese measures to deal with nuclear North Korea.

China’s often-repeated, overarching goal in the Korean peninsula remains “stability.” China’s behavior in the face of various crises initiated mainly by North Korea seems to underline this goal; by emphasizing stability, Chinese officials and commentators help explain why China eschews pressure on North Korea that could provoke a backlash or other developments adverse to stability on the peninsula. At the same time, China also is seen to have a longer-term interest in strengthening Chinese influence and reducing U.S. and Japanese influence on the peninsula.85 Recent Chinese policy and practice have not highlighted this goal, though China’s strong objections for several months in 2010 to U.S. and South Korea military exercises in the Yellow Sea raised questions about China’s continued willingness to coexist with the U.S.–South Korea alliance.86

In general, Beijing has been careful not to be seen directly challenging U.S. leadership in dealing with North Korea’s nuclear proliferation and broader Korean affairs.87 The Chinese administration generally sustained a broadly accommodating posture that allowed for concurrent improvements in China’s relations with South Korea and effective management of China’s sometimes difficult relations with North Korea. During the repeated crises over North Korea’s nuclear program since 2002, China’s cooperation with the United States, South Korea, and other concerned powers in seeking a negotiated solution to the problem enhanced overall positive development in China’s relations with these countries, while managing tensions over the North Korean program in ways that avoided conflict or helped reduce the instability caused by Pyongyang’s provocative actions.

China’s cautious and incremental efforts to strengthen its influence in the Korean peninsula and thereby reduce U.S., Japanese, and other potentially adverse influence in this critically important bordering area seem very much in line with China’s overall approach to advancing its interests in Asian and world affairs in the post–Cold War period. The pattern of Chinese post–Cold War interaction with neighboring states has been to slowly but surely spread Chinese influence though diplomatic, economic, and security interaction that emphasizes the positives and plays down the negatives in the Chinese–neighboring country relationships. China also relies heavily on the steady growth of what senior Chinese foreign policy officials call China’s “weight” to cause neighbors to improve their relations with China over time, eschew foreign connections and practices opposed by China, and thereby create a regional order more supportive of Chinese interests. The Chinese officials suggest that China’s “weight” includes its salient and rapidly growing economic importance to Asian neighbors, its leadership in Asian multilateral groups and international diplomacy, and the rapidly expanding reach of advanced Chinese military forces.88

The Chinese administration generally is patient in pursuing regional influence. Domestic Chinese priorities require continued regional stability. While there remains active debate among commentators and officials in China over how assertive China should be in dealing with Asian and world affairs, the central leaderships appears to have reaffirmed recently a cautious approach that continues to avoid risks, costs, or commitments with potentially adverse consequences for the Chinese administration’s goals, which are centered on sustaining their rule in a supportive environment in China and abroad.89

In sum, when assessing reasons for China’s refusal to cooperate closely with the United States and South Korea in response to North Korea’s recent provocations, it is important to look beyond immediate concerns with stability on the Korean peninsula. China’s approach to North Korea also is driven by a broad, albeit slow-moving and low-risk, drive to establish an order in the Korean peninsula more influenced by China and less influenced by foreign and other elements seen as adverse to Chinese interests. In this context, growing Chinese frustration with the twists and turns of North Korean behavior, especially Pyongyang’s nuclear weapons development, has not resulted in a major change in China’s reluctance to pressure North Korea to conform to international norms and eschew provocations and confrontation. China’s focus has been to preserve stability in an uncertain environment caused by internal pressures and international provocations of North Korea, and sometimes erratic policies by the United States and South Korea. China continues to follow practices that give priority to positive incentives rather than pressure in order to elicit North Korean willingness to avoid further provocations and to return to negotiations on eventual denuclearization.

Developments in China–North Korean relations in the two decades following the Cold War can be divided into three periods:90

• 1989–2000 featured Chinese angst over North Korean leadership transition and instability and economic collapse, and crisis with the United States prompted by North Korea’s nuclear weapons development. 2000–2001 featured a period of unprecedented détente, where China facilitated North Korean outreach and endeavored to keep pace with expanding North Korean contacts with South Korea, the United States, Russia, and others. 2002–2009 featured periodic and intense North Korean provocations and wide swings in U.S. policy, ranging from thinly disguised efforts to force regime change in North Korea to close collaboration with Pyongyang negotiators. South Korean policy also shifted markedly from a soft to a harder line in dealing with North Korea.

China’s frustration grew with North Korea’s continued development of nuclear weapons and other provocative actions. Chinese officials obviously miscalculated when they argued in the past that North Korea’s nuclear weapons program was not a serious one but represented an effort to elicit aid and other support from the United States, South Korea. and others. China’s more recent working assumption seemed to be a more realistic one—North Korea is intent on keeping nuclear weapons. In response, China was more willing, albeit with continued reservations, to join U.S.- backed efforts in the United Nations to criticize and impose limited sanctions on North Korea until it resumes negotiations leading to denuclearization. Meanwhile, the debate about the need to shift Chinese North Korean policy toward a harder line became part of a wider public debate about the future of Chinese foreign policy.91

Complementing the modest hardening in China’s stance toward North Korea were a series of recent positive steps China took to offer unspecified but apparently substantial economic and other incentives to North Korea amid a major burst of high-level official engagement between the two sides.92 The mix of Chinese actions, seemingly involving more carrots than sticks, underlined Chinese concern to preserve stability and China’s position as the foreign power with the best relationship with both North and South Korea. China was prepared to acquiesce to a continued nuclear North Korea for the foreseeable future, rather than risk dangers associated with strong pressure on Pyongyang. The future of North Korea could be violent and disruptive. China sought to avoid such negative outcomes and to sustain a position of influence in determining the future of the peninsula.

# Recent Developments—A Step Backward for China

China has made gains since the start of 2010 in solidifying its position as the most important and avid supporter of the North Korean leadership, as Pyongyang witnesses the most significant leadership transition in a generation amid poor domestic conditions and generally unfriendly international circumstances.93 China also has deepened economic relations with both North and South Korea. Though China–North Korean discussions remain secret, it appears that bilateral relations have registered significant improvement despite differences over North Korea’s proliferation and military provocations.

The same cannot be said about China’s relations with South Korea. In 2010, those ties reached the lowest point since the establishment of China– South Korea diplomatic relations; recent contacts designed to improve relations have barely hidden deep differences. China’s refusal to criticize North

Korean military attacks against South Korea left a lasting and widespread impression of where China’s priorities lay when choosing between North and South Korea. Against this background and contrary to China’s longerterm objective to diminish U.S. and Japanese influence on the Korean peninsula, China has faced strengthened U.S.–South Korea and U.S.–Japan alliance relationships, and closer strategic coordination between South Korea and Japan. Adding to South Korean and U.S. differences with China was Beijing’s unexpectedly strong public opposition in 2010 to U.S.–South Korea military exercises in the Yellow Sea that were targeted at showing allied resolve and deepening deterrence against further North Korean military provocations.94

# Chinese Advances

China’s top leader Hu Jintao was in the vanguard of Chinese representatives seeking to underline Chinese support for the leadership transition in North Korea. Hu hosted visiting North Korean leader Kim Jong Il during three trips to China, in May and August 2010, and May 2011. The visits presumably were related to the beginnings of a formal transition from Kim Jong Il to leaders, including Kim’s son Kim Jong-un, who were elevated to top positions at the first Workers Party of Korea party conference in fortyfour years in September 2010. There followed a blizzard of speeches and publicity marking close China–North Korea relations, including important speeches by China’s heir apparent, Vice President Xi Jinping, and a wide range of high-level party and security exchanges throughout the rest of the year and into 2011.95

The public displays of solidarity came along with some reports of differences between Beijing and Pyongyang over North Korea’s proliferation activities and military attacks against South Korea. On balance, the Chinese leadership was clearly emphasizing the positive in its public posture toward Pyongyang. It backed up its support by thwarting South Korean–led efforts in the United Nations and elsewhere to press North Korea to bear consequences for sinking the Cheonan and attacking Yeonpyeong Island, and for its nuclear proliferation activities at home and abroad.

China also advanced various economic ties with North Korea. According to Chinese customs data, China–North Korea trade in the first half of 2010 amounted to $\$ 129$ billion, a 16.8 percent annual increase. North Korea imported $\$ 940$ million in goods from China and exported $\$ 350$ million during the period. North Korea imports from China rose markedly, with flour imports rising by 383 percent. North Korea’s crude oil imports from China remained the same. Minerals and other natural resources continued to account for a large portion of North Korean exports to China. China also provided unspecified humanitarian assistance in 2010. China’s trade and aid ties with North Korea raised concerns about the effects of those ties on UN and other international sanctions. Meanwhile, roads, railways, bridges, and other projects facilitating transportation between China and North Korea were under construction.96

As noted above, economic ties also grew between China and South Korea. China–South Korea trade during 2010 amounted to $\$ 171$ billion, according to official South Korean figures, a 21 percent increase from $\$ 141$ billion in 2009. China remained South Korea’s top destination for investment, which totaled over $\$ 30$ billion in 2010 and represented 21 percent of South Korea’s total foreign direct investment (FDI). Meanwhile, the number of Chinese visitors to South Korea rose 48 percent in 2009, reaching 1.21 million. South Korean tourists were the largest group of foreign tourists visiting China in the first half of 2010, totaling 1.95 million; this marked an increase of 30 percent from the same period in 2008, and accounted for 15.5 percent of the total foreign tourists in China.97

# Chinese Setbacks

China’s response to the Cheonan incident and other military provocations and proliferation activities placed the greatest strain on China–South Korean relations in a generation. They brought relations to a new low. They sparked significant debate in South Korea, highlighting the relative weakness of China–South Korea political and security ties and strategic coordination despite close trade ties. These weak links contrasted sharply with Beijing’s concurrent strengthening political ties with the current leadership in Pyongyang and increasing trade and economic exchanges at a time of stalled inter-Korean relations.98

Among other setbacks for China were the following:

• China’s political and economic support of North Korea at a time of international condemnation of Pyongyang undermined perceptions of China’s regional and international role as mediator of the six-party talks and as a responsible stakeholder in the international community. President Obama seemed to capture the sentiment of many world opinion leaders in criticizing China’s “willful blindness” in the face of North Korean provocations.99   
• North Korea’s provocations introduced a high level of frustration into China’s relations with not only South Korea but also the United States, Japan, Australia, and a number of Western powers.   
North Korea’s provocations pushed the North Korean issue to the top of the U.S. policy agenda with China; China’s failure to act to curb North Korea has been accompanied by senior American leaders, including Secretary of Defense Robert Gates, warning bluntly in public

that the North Korean nuclear program is now viewed as a direct threat to the United States. An implication is that if China doesn’t act to rein in North Korea, the United States will have to take action on its own.100 • China’s weak response to North Korea’s provocations and its unanticipated assertions in 2010 that U.S.–South Korea military exercises to counter North Korea were a threat to China helped solidify the already close U.S. relationship with South Korea. They also enhanced trilateral cooperation among the United States, South Korea, and Japan in order to deal effectively with North Korea in the absence of significant support from China.101

In sum, China faced a Korean peninsula marked by growing tension and deepening involvement by the United States and Japan at odds with Chinese interests. China’s credibility and broader international reputation were battered. In return, China had solidified relations with North Korea. Unfortunately for China, there remained large questions about North Korea’s future trajectory. North Korea’s uranium enrichment program and other proliferation activities showed nuclear ambitions opposed to Chinese efforts to lead North Korea to denuclearization. North Korea’s emphasis on self-reliance as its national development strategy contradicts Chinese efforts to promote Chinese-style reform and opening of the North.